Wait, get the recording underway, and then crack into it.
Hello.
All right, there we go. We've got recording is live.
Oh, my God.
Well, good afternoon, and welcome to the Social Services and Community Select
Committee. Great to have you here this afternoon. Thanks.
You've traveled a long way. So we've got 30 minutes
on the Trusts Horizon Trust Variations Bill.
We've got first up a 30-minute public hearing with David Glover, chairman,
and Derek Caldwell, chief executive of Trusts Horizon.
So look, we have material from you.
Oh, and
Legal
... got the lawyer, the leading counsel, so thank you for that point out from a
great member, Danica Goedeker.
So look, the time is yours. If you want to leave time for questions, please feel
free, please. So look, we're in your hands.
Kia ora.
Tēnā, tēnā koutou katoa. I'm David Glover. I'm the chair of the trust.
This is Derek. We saw this on Zoom last time around, and I think Jonathan was here
in person. So it's great to be in person this time around and
answer your questions. That is a very important bill from our point of view,
at least.
So, the first thing I just wanted to cover off was that following the last
meeting, there was a request that maybe the company might attend the next
meeting, and we sent that letter on the 5th saying that the chair and the
chief exec are overseas.
And hopefully, we've gone some way to answering some of the, certainly, the legal
questions around the relationship between the company and the trust.
But they're very happy to appear in front of the committee should you
still require that at some point in the future.
Thank you.
And we can talk about any of those issues today if you want
to pursue those. We really want to spend most of the
time giving you the opportunity to ask us questions, so we don't
have a long preamble. Hopefully, you had a chance to receive the
note that came through quite late yesterday, so I appreciate the impulse on your
time.
So what I'd invite Derek, our chief exec, to do is just at a very high level,
cover those points.
Right.
And if you want to then dive into deeper specifics as we go through, that might be
a way to structure the conversation.
Sounds good.
Does that work for the committee?
Yeah, excellent. No, thank you.
Thank you. Over to you, Derek.
Thank you. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Yeah, so we
structured our submission in relation to the 15 questions that we
received.
And we broke that down further into
six sort of thematic areas.
And
we thought it would be good to touch
on each thematic area briefly,
and then happy to sort of take questions on each area
as we go through it, if that makes sense. Yep.
So the six areas
that we've outlined in our submission, why does the problem,
an accumulation of capital, justify the solution
in relation to broadening the trust purposes?
And ultimately, this comes down to trustees are actually
obliged to consider broadening the purposes when we do have an
accumulation of capital in the trust.
Could the problem be addressed by proactively
seeking projects that fund energy-related purposes?
I think this was sort of a
key point, and so we really wanted to
outline to the committee just what we do in this space.
Over our 30 years, we've been granting over 40%
into proactive projects that are energy-related, that are
initiated from the trust,
and we're very proud of that history.
And we'll continue to do that as well.
And we've put some modeling in there to sort of show even if we were to double
how much we could proactively grant, we'd still have the structural issue that
we're coming to you today with.
Can the problem be addressed by a non-legislative method?
Yeah. Effectively, what we're asking is to bring ourselves into line with those
other charitable trusts that were set up at the same time back in '92.
And obviously, the legal advice is that the type of
change that we're wanting to make in terms of broadening our purpose could only be
done through Parliament. We're not seeking a minor
change to our purpose. It is a fundamental change.
Does the bill respect the original intent of the settlor?
In terms of the
settlor-At the time, it was an act of
Parliament. It wasn't a private settler.
And in our view, what this allows is the funds to be
distributed towards the highest and best use.
So we feel that actually, the original tint of
the settler,
it was a process that had to be gone through at the time.
And so viewing it as well within
trustees and
Parliament's purview.
What level of distribution does the trust expect to make if its charitable purposes
are broadened? So we expect to be able to achieve what other
charitable trusts achieve,
typically around the 3% of equity, and that would enable a further 2.8
million
to go back into the community on an annual basis.
So it's very significant when you look at, we're granting
3.5 million currently into the community.
How will the trust remain responsive to the community if the bill is passed?
So we already have very strict
accountability requirements to the community through elected members,
through the Charities Commission, through our annual reporting,
and obligations back to the community, and those won't change.
So I'll leave it there. So happy to sort of take
questions
on each of the sections, if that makes sense.
Yeah, thank you. I might ask the first one.
Just that structural issue you were talking about that will remain unaddressed.
Can you just give us a, for those watching, a bit more of an outline of what you
mean by a structural issue?
So that is with the current limitation,
which over... And this isn't a recent challenge.
This has been going on over 30 years in terms of the
accumulation of capital continues, and it will
continue to accelerate,
if we're not able to grant more out into the community.
And if we remain limited by energy related purposes,
which
from the trust perspective, we will continue to grant into energy related
purposes because they're charitable.
They're charitable, they're part of our kaupapa.
We've had 30 years of granting into that space.
So that's going to continue. What we're asking is to be able to
unlock further granting into the community for things that are not
energy related.
No, thank you. Next question, Helen.
Hey. So,
we've had some really interesting discussion in the committee about this,
and it feels like the heart of the issue is, if you
were to remain with the purposes that you've got,
is that an opportunity to do stuff in the energy
space which will perhaps be more
creative and unlock potential? Or
are we actually stopping other pathways
by expanding the range of things that you can do?
I was born in Cara, so I know how important
just addressing basic poverty is in this
area, but that's the sort of part of the dispute that is
going on or the questions that are being asked.
Yes, and I think I'd direct you to
where we've given examples of the challenge of the
limitations,
paragraph 62.
So,
if energy related can only go so far, and typically for a
project, it's about a third of the cost.
And so we can grant that third, and we do, and often that
acts as a catalyst for them to go and seek further funding.
But they've got to raise another two thirds of that funding.
And if that two thirds isn't forthcoming, those projects don't happen,
and our funding isn't utilized.
Mm-hmm.
So
as I say, we can continue to try and think
creatively about how we execute and expand our energy related
funding. But that's going to rely on others to come
in and provide that two to four, so for every dollar we put
in, that $2 to $4, and I guess where is that coming from?
What we're saying is that could be coming from us.
Rather than our dollar, it could be $3, and then they only have to go and find $1.
The project and the outcome that's being sought is still the
same.
So we just don't
agree that limiting us to only being able to fund a third of that
project is a sensible outcome.
Okay, thank you.
Supplementary, Maureen.
So can you explain that third? Is that a commitment in the
deed?
And are you talking about energy related projects?
So this
could be any project, so like building a marae, wharekai.
Generally, they are
build projects.
And the third is from our experience.
So effectively, the electrical components of that
build typically are about a third of the cost.
So that could be the electrical supply,
the fire and alarm systems-
Oh, I see
... et cetera. Heating, ventilation.
Thank you.
If I can maybe help the committee. Obviously, the trust has,
its purpose at the moment is energy related purposes, but it can't fund anything
that's to do with electricity because it's charitable.
So it has to be charitable independently, and then it can fund the energy
related component. So, charitable under the existing law
is advancement of education, relief of poverty, other things
beneficial to the community. There's a religious limb for historic reasons.
So, and what I think Derek is saying, and the examples in paragraph
62 of the written submissions, a marae can come along and say, "We want
to increase our resilience so that in times of emergency we can provide
emergency shelter to people in the region." The trust can fund the energy
related component, so if they need a new generator, if they want to put solar in,
they can fund that. But if the roof needs replacing or there are other
things, they can't fund them because although the project itself overall is
charitable, they're limited in that charitable world to the energy related
components. So when Derek says, if the trust can
green light that project, but they'll still need to find two thirds of the other
funding to do the other non-energy related components.
So-When they first came to me and said, "We want to do
wider things," one naturally thinks of new projects.
But a lot of what the trust is really talking about is saying-
Mm, quite
... "We want to support this project, but it can't get off the ground unless we can
do other non-energy related things." So it's releasing them to fund the same sort
of charitable projects, but other components.
So there's an example in the submission about a food bank.
They can pay for new refrigerators that are more energy efficient or freezers, but
they can't put food in the fridges or the freezers to meet the community need,
because it's got to be both charitable, and then only the energy related components
of the charity. If that helps clarify.
Yes.
Supplementary, Scott.
Yeah, so I do have a supplement and another question, Chair.
But surely, we all know that
buildings have a relationship to energy.
The more well-insulated, the fewer leaks.
The energy that we don't use is the cheapest
energy we've got. So I would've thought that a marae that's
leaky falls into a charitable purpose, an energy
related charitable purpose. Is that not how you'd interpret it?
Certainly working in the community energy space,
a healthy home is an energy efficient home.
Mm.
It's not the electricity, it's the home.
It's the wraparound. It's the
hat, the floor, the shoes, and the
warm coat that's around it. That's the
energy bundle that you've got to keep people healthy.
Surely it's the same for a marae.
So fundamentally,
what keeps any building warm is the
insulation. You've got to be able to heat it.
So we can fund the insulation, which we do, and we fund the heating, which we
do.
And the roof to keep the-
Well, the roof itself doesn't
actually provide that insulation to the heat escaping.
It's the insulation.
Well, it stops the water falling on the insulation.
Yeah.
Just seems to be a bit of a-
Yeah. All right. New question, Scott.
Yeah. So
thinking about the charitable purpose, and I take your point that you've been
looking, it's not simply reactively but proactively.
Are you saying that you can only contribute
one third of a cost, or was that the example of the electrical cost to
a larger project?
Because if, for example, you wanted to make an offer to the
community, anyone
with a high deprivation could have access to
solar plus batteries,
for example, and that would help the system.
But it's only electrical gear. Would that be
something that you could proactively do, or you
just can't do that? Is that...
In terms... Sorry,
the first element of your question?
First element was,
I'm a little bit unclear whether you were saying you can only fund
one third of a project as a charitable trust, or were you only
referring to a specific project that it has a third of the
electrical-
Yeah. That's related.
So you could fund 100%
for a charitable purpose.
As long as it's energy related.
As long as it's energy related. So what's to stop you going
to the most deprived in the community,
and we can pick them up through the deprivation index, and saying, "We
offer X amount of solar plus batteries to
help reduce your electricity bills." Is there anything that
is... And would you still do that?
I guess,
fundamentally, as long
as we could show it was
relief of poverty,
then-
Well, lowered electricity bills
... then it would come within our purview.
Yeah. Lowered electricity bills would certainly help relieve poverty.
And I think there's a couple of things that can be added to that.
One is in relation to the insulation space, as we explained in the
submission, the trust has now insulated, over its life, 60% of the
homes in the district it serves. Which I think is really pretty
phenomenal when you bear in mind that not everyone would meet the deprivation
index, so you couldn't do 100% anyway.
You've got new homes that have been constructed which won't need it.
So it illustrates the extent of the work that the trust
has done historically in that space.
And there's also examples in the paper about the provision of, for example,
interest-free grants to put in solar systems in
community organizations. So that's certainly work that can be
done
as an energy related purpose. But there are limits
to how widely that can go because at a certain point,
you're providing private benefits, not charitable benefits, if you're going and
making grants to individual people.
Which is a fundamental tension in all charities law, that you've got to choose
projects that are meeting community need rather than
grants to individuals. So that's a constraint that always
exists there, but it's one of a purpose that could be met in addition to
others if the purposes that the trust can meet are expanded.
So supplement. So I guess,
ECA has the program, the Warm Kiwi Homes program.
Mm-hmm.
That serves a wider public good insulating
homes. And
you can argue that it could do more,
and we believe it could do more. But
the same purpose could be met, the same social purpose could be met with
solar plus batteries, which would also help develop community
resilience and reduce congestion on the grid.
So it would have wide system benefits as well as great
public benefits in reducing poverty in our community.
And yes, of course, it would go into individual homes.
But in much the same way that the Warm Kiwi
Homes program uses the deprivation index to have
wider public benefit. Is that not something that you
could consider? And to come back to the
Stretch this up a little bit. To come back to the-
We do need to
... warmer Kiwi homes.
Warmer Kiwi homes. We know that just insulation and underfloor is
not enough. We can do so much more with retrofitting wall
insulation, double glazing,
ventilation,
removal of black mould. Those things are really critical as well.
So surely there's a broader spectrum here.
If the broader question is, are there more innovative energy related things we
can do in the future? Absolutely. We didn't have solar 20 years ago.
We did, started off with warmer Kiwi homes very early and insulation.
That's coming to a natural
end or in terms of size of opportunity, and there's new technology.
So of course, we will continue to look at that.
But I think one of the charts in the submission says even if we doubled our
proactive granting, we would still have this structural problem
of our assets growing faster than our ability to grant.
So I
think encouraging us to be creative in that space, absolutely.
That's the space we've been operating for many years, and we will continue to
innovate. It's not an either/or from our point of view,
because the financial growth will still happen
if we believe,
if we double, say, instead of 40% of the granting being
proactive, we double that, we will still have this issue of a
surplus, which we would like the community to benefit from
on a consistent basis. So
support the idea of exploring more innovative ideas completely.
And just if I may. So, our focus has always been on
best and most efficient use of our resources.
So you will have seen,
in our submission, we're heavily invested in community solar.
So where we can support Marae,
council, community halls and others to put large
scale solar on,
which has a wider benefit, schools as well.
So that the benefit of those facilities can be shared
amongst the broader community, and that's a much more efficient
approach.
Excellent. I'll now move to the local Member of Parliament and the sponsor of the
bill, who has a question. Or two.
Thank you. I have a question because you'll remember that in the
previous hearing, Dr. Victor Luca raised the issue of
perhaps the trust could
invest in research and development to grow new and innovative
energy related projects that would potentially benefit
the
region. And my concern is that if you do that, then the money is
then spent on research and development and on consultants and
reports and not on the front line when we already have a multitude
of people who have projects and ideas.
So I'm just interested in your view on, or the trust view
on that approach.
Yeah, absolutely. In the trust history, we have invested in research and
development areas.
We've looked across the region in terms of where there are opportunities for
generation
back in the early 2000s, and then people
could utilize, the community could utilize that in terms of actually where
generation was sited, et cetera. But fundamentally, we're
about enabling our capital back
into the community for real tangible projects in the
community.
So for any research project, it would naturally need to be limited
to something that sort of benefits our district.
Okay. Thank you.
A supplemental?
No, I'm .
Oh, okay. Maureen.
Look, one of the suggestions I had in my, one of my questions
was around the trust's,
the consideration of an amendment to the bill, which put a
higher emphasis on energy related projects rather
than just an open, around broadening of the scope of the
trust.
Yeah, so
we think that would be problematic, and I think James, John, are you .
Sure. Yeah, happy to. Sorry, did you...
I'm not sure you finished, the question.
No, that's all right.
Are you sure?
I think you've got the message. Yeah.
Got the message? Yeah.
It was about the, yeah, amendment.
The trust is open to exploring amendments
that the committee is interested in, but my advice to
the trust
has been that we would be cautious about an
amendment which sought to
constitutionalize, if I can use that word, through the terms of the trust,
ratios or limits of where the money needs to go.
And the reason is that we're effectively here because we've got that at the moment.
We're being directed down to one path and the trust started with $5
billion, it's now got 220. So it's a tremendous community
success story, and it faces a tremendously enviable problem of having too much
money.
But we don't really want to have to come back to you, as pleasant as you all are,
as much as we enjoy talking to you, in 15 years to make further
amendments. And what we would really like to do is to put the
trust on the same footing as the other charitable trusts that were established
under the reforms and let the decisions about what are great ideas
that members have on particular projects be assessed by the
trustees who are locally elected.
And they can say, "Yes, this year some solar is the best way to
spend our money that's going to give the best bang for buck into the community.
But next year it might be something that doesn't have an energy link in
terms of a school or a Marae or some other healthcare
facility that's needed in the community." And I guess the real plea
that the trustees are making to you, is
that they would like those decisions to be able to be made locally about which
projects to support, which is the case for all the other trusts that we're aware of
that were established under this process.
And it seems really an accident of history that the good people of Eastern Bay of
Plenty are left with that particular focus.
So we're happy to have a discussion around that if there are particular things
that members would be interested in.
Just a supplementary on that. If I can just, so there's
a-I'm, Central Otago's part of my region, and I'm well aware the trust there
is very successful, and they have broad latitude to do
things within their deed.
So I'm just curious why, yeah, why did-
Yeah, why was it so narrow?
Why did you end up with one different from everyone else?
I think that the shortest
answer to that is the people that were tasked with developing these deeds were the
local electric power boards, which were being disestablished.
So although it's made at a community level, it's not made by the
community in the sense of people coming together and collectively saying, "What do
we want to do with this asset, which is effectively going to come to us as part
of the deregulation?" And, if I was being cynical,
I don't think there's any documents which show why the decision was made, but it
does rather look like the purposes were kept narrow so that they were as
closely aligned to what the company would be doing rather than the
community. The other thing I think that one can see from looking at the document
is there's a clause in the trustee that required a review after five years about
whether it should continue. And it was possibly thought, I think, if you look back,
that if they were only going to have about $5 million, you've got a large region
with a lot of money, that that money might be spent and there might not be much
more to do, and it's become much more successful, I suspect, than anyone
envisaged, and so has created this happy problem.
Laura.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question is a little bit
about the company side of things back to the trust and the
amount that is coming across to you.
Can we have a bit of details about the amounts, and is
it from the company perspective enough for them to enable
to do their business well? Because there's been some
cases historically in the last five or so years of, say,
Marae being cut off. I know in Galatea, for
example, one of my members of Parliament's hometown, so
there was a big issue there that the community was essentially cut off from
electricity because of weather and then line maintenance and stuff.
So that's a huge issue for a really small, vulnerable community.
And I'm just wondering
whether
the
dividend or the amount that's coming back into your trust is
actually the right amount.
And getting a bit more around the reason
of those kind of failures and should there actually be
some of the stuff in the company that they can actually deal with some of the
infrastructure side of things, I guess.
Because that key for infrastructure is really important.
But yeah, I don't understand the dynamics, I guess, very well.
It might be something you have to send back to the committee later and totally
appreciate that.
Yeah. So just-
Oh, you go.
Yeah.
At a high level,
so
as a trust, the company is just one investment.
Mm-hmm.
And the company itself,
the lines distribution component of that company is only
about 10% of its revenue.
Okay.
So,
their directors are independent of the trust.
Mm-hmm.
They have fiduciary duties-
Yeah
... to make sure that the lines business is
well maintained, it's resilient,
and they have accountability back to the community as well.
Mm-hmm.
As you know, when the power goes out,
the community-
Mm
... is very quick-
Yeah
... to let their feelings known.
And particularly when it's a big event, whether
it's Cyclone Cook, Debbie, or others,
it's a very challenging time. I used to be the network manager for the company.
Mm-hmm.
And it takes a concerted effort and a long period of time to
get everyone back on.
We've got to focus on getting sort of the bulk of customers back on as quickly as
we possibly can, and a huge amount of time and effort goes into
that.
New question, Scott.
So my question, and I'll try and be succinct, is about the
experience you have, and you mentioned you're
previously a network manager, Derek, but the experience you have in
what is a really
fast-moving energy transition we're underway to look at the opportunities,
not just Marae scale, but the distributed energy
resources. Do you think you really are seeing all of the opportunities that are
out there? Because
from my perspective, I think there's so much you could do, so much you could
do right now.
Yes, I think, and sort of talked about this previously.
There's a community capability and capacity constraint as well.
It's not just funding. So we have an example of
community scale solar battery project in Tikaha
that's been sort of in the making for about three years.
We've been involved right from the outset,
and they actually acknowledged that
without the trust's support, it probably wouldn't have
got to where it is,
because they were going down the track of just a solar installation without
battery, et cetera.
So we not only provide
funding and backing for these projects, we actually provide a
level of technical support as well for them too.
So,
yes, there are other areas within our communities that we'd love to
see bigger scale projects and opportunities,
but we've got to work with the community to make those happen.
Last question, Maureen.
Actually, it-
Oh, that was it. Covered?
Yeah, I think Scott's covered it. My question was the same, and it's one that we've
discussed, is about
how are you sure that you've saturated all the opportunities?
Yeah, and I think the key is we haven't, right?
So we're not saying there are not more opportunities that we
can
direct our money towards. What we're saying is when we model
it out and we make some assumptions about even if we're
doubling what we're doing in that space, we will still have this problem
if we don't do something to actually broaden our purpose.
Well, thank you very much for coming in this afternoon, David, Derek, and
Jonathan.
Thank you.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much for the committee's time.
Thank you. Thanks for travel-
Looking at more answers